# Financial Terms

## The Basics – Income Statement

The income statement has (arguably) the single most important financial report in today’s business world. It is a good starting point when analyzing a business.

### Revenue

Revenue comes before earnings. Revenue is also known as sales or the ‘top line’. It is the amount of money generated from the sale of a product or service. If revenue is increasing that shows an increased demand for a company’s products/services. Declining revenue shows the opposite.

### Expenses

Expenses are the opposite side of revenue. Revenue less expenses equals profit. Expenses are all the costs a business has (including taxes, interest, payroll, research and development, cost of goods sold, etc).

### Depreciation

Depreciation is the reduction in value of an asset over time due to normal wear and tear. As an example, your car will be worth less next year than it is worth today. This decrease in value over time is expensed as depreciation in accounting. The depreciation of intangible assets is called amortization.

### Earnings and Adjusted Earnings

Earnings are what is left over after all expenses – including interest and taxes – are paid.

Adjusted earnings are earnings after adjusting for non-cash expenses such as depreciation and amortization. Adjusted earnings are used to compare earnings between companies that have different capital structures (i.e. different amounts of debt).

### Earnings Before Interest and Taxes (EBIT)

EBIT can be calculated as revenue minus expenses excluding tax and interest. EBIT is also known as operating income since they both exclude interest expenses and taxes from their calculations. However, there are cases when operating income can differ from EBIT.

### Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (EBITDA)

By stripping out the non-cash depreciation and amortization expense as well as taxes and debt costs dependent on the capital structure, EBITDA attempts to represent cash profit generated by the company’s operations.

> EBITDA is not a metric recognized under generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP).

### Net Income

Net income is the amount of money a company makes after accounting for all expenses, including taxes and interest. Net income is also known as net profit or net earnings.

### Earnings-Per-Share

Earnings-per-share (EPS) is the amount of earnings a company generates per share of stock. EPS is calculated by dividing the company’s earnings by the number of shares outstanding. EPS is a measure of a company’s profitability.

### Gross Margin

Gross margin is gross profit divided by revenue. Gross profit is revenue minus cost of goods sold. Gross margin tells you what percentage of revenue a business keeps before paying any expenses other than the cost of goods.

### Operating Margin

Operating margin is operating profit divided by revenue. Operating profit includes most expenses, but does not include interest or taxes. Operating margin gives picture of the profitability of a business without obscuring earnings power with interest expenses or differences in taxes.

### Net Margin

Net margin (also called net profit margin) is net income divided by revenue. It is the ‘bottom line’ number that shows what percentage of every dollar in revenue a company keeps after accounting for all expenses.

## The Basics – Balance Sheet

The balance sheet shows the current position of a business, including cash, debt, and assets. It gives a snapshot of the financial state of a business.

### Assets

An asset is property (including intangible property) that has value and could likely be used to meet debts, commitments, or liabilities. Examples include current assets, land, equipment, goodwill, patents, and vehicles (among many others).

### Amortization

Amortization is a method of spreading an intangible asset's cost over the course of its useful life. Amortization is the opposite of depreciation. For example, a patent is an intangible asset that is amortized over its useful life.

### Current Assets

Current assets are a subset of assets. The definition of a current asset is any balance sheet item that can be reasonably expected to be converted to cash within one year. Examples include: cash, cash equivalents, marketable investments (like publicly traded stocks), accounts receivable, and inventory, among others.

### Fixed Assets

Which can’t immediately be turned into cash, but are tangible items that a company owns and uses to generate long-term income

### Liabilities

Liabilities are future obligations a business is likely to owe. They are the opposite of assets. Examples of liabilities include current liabilities and long-term debt.

### Current Liabilities

Current liabilities are the opposite of current assets. Current liabilities are obligations that are reasonably expected to be paid within one year. Examples include short-term debt and accounts payable.

### Debt

The term ‘debt’ is used interchangeably in accounting, finance, and investing. It often refers specifically to bonds, credit lines, and other borrowings. Occasionally debt is used as a synonym for liabilities, as is the case in the debt to equity ratio.

### Equity

Equity is assets minus liabilities. It is a quick way to broadly gauge the overall built up value in a corporation. In general, more equity is better than less equity. Equity is also called **book value**.

## The Basics – Cash Flow Statement

The cash flow statement shows cash flows into and out of the company. It is less prone to management manipulation than the income statement.

Cash flow refers to the net balance of cash moving in and out of a business at a specific point in time. Cash flow is commonly broken into three categories, including:

- **Operating Cash Flow**: The net cash generated from normal business operations
- **Investing Cash Flow**: The net cash generated from investing activities, such as securities investments and the purchase or sale of assets
- **Financing Cash Flow**: The net cash generated financing a business, including debt payments, shareholders’ equity, and dividend payments

### Capital Expenditures

Capital expenditures are money spent by a business to purchase assets. Capital expenditures are often abbreviated as cap ex. It is important to differentiate between maintenance capital expenditures and growth capital expenditures. Maintenance capital expenditures should approximate depreciation (in straight forward cases) over the long run. Growth capital expenditures are funds spent on expanding the business rather than replacing old portions of the business.

### Operating Cash flow & Cash Flow from Operations

Operating cash flow shows a company’s cash flows from its normal operations. It does not include depreciation and amortization, as well as other non-cash charges.

Operating cash flow (OCF) is a measure of the amount of cash generated by a company's normal business operations. Operating cash flow indicates whether a company can generate sufficient positive cash flow to maintain and grow its operations, otherwise, it may require external financing for capital expansion.

### Free Cash Flow

Free cash flow (FCF) is the cash a company generates after taking into consideration cash outflows that support its operations and maintain its capital assets. In other words, free cash flow is the cash left over after a company pays for its operating expenses (OpEx) and capital expenditures (CapEx).

## The Basics – Miscellaneous

### Market Capitalization

This is the total market value of a company’s outstanding shares. There are a few different classes of stocks based on market cap:

- **Micro-caps**: Market caps below $300 million
- **Small-caps**: Market caps of $300 million to $2 billion. See the Russell 2000 Stocks here.
- **Mid-caps**: Market caps of $2 billion to $10 billion.
- **Large-cap stocks**: Market caps of $10 billion to $200 billion.
- **Mega-cap stocks**: Market caps above $200 billion.

### Enterprise Value

Enterprise Value calculates what it would cost to completely take over a business.

To do so you would have to buy all the shares in a business (market cap) and extinguish all debt (total debt). Once you took over the business you could distribute all excess cash to yourself.

In its most basic form the formula for calculating enterprise value is:

Enterprise Value = Market Cap + Total Debt - Cash

### Ticker

The ticker symbol (or ticker) is the 1 to 5 digit alphabetic code used to identify the shares of a specific corporation.

### Sector

Sector refers to the broad business category a stock falls into. There is no standard sector classification for different sectors. The most common include the following:

- Consumer Discretionary
- Consumer Staples
- Financials
- Health Care
- Industrial Goods
- Technology
- Utilities

### Volume

Volume is the amount of shares of a stock traded. It is generally calculated as daily volume. There is additional risk with buying and selling thinly traded shares as the bid-ask spreads tend to be much higher. Higher volume typically means you will be able to buy and sell easily.

## Profitability Ratios

Profitability ratios can be used to determine how efficient a business is at making money. They are also useful in comparing the profitability of different businesses to one another. In general higher profitability ratios mean a company has a stronger competitive advantage.

### Return on Assets (ROA)

Return on Assets is calculated as net income divided by total assets. It is one of the simplest and most effective profitability ratios. Assets are used to scale profits as (virtually) every business has assets.

$$
\text{ROA} = \frac{\text{Net Income}}{\text{Total Assets}}
$$

### Return on Equity (ROE)

Return on equity is calculated as net income divided by equity. It shows the percentage of profit a company can make on its equity every year. For some businesses (a retailer in growth mode is a suitable example), this is a good way to gauge how quickly a company can grow.

$$
\text{ROE} = \frac{\text{Net Income}}{\text{Total Equity}}
$$

### Return on Invested Capital (ROIC)

Return on invested capital identifies the profit a company is making on money from its capital base.

The numerator in the formula is net operating profit after taxes (abbreviated as NOPAT). This does not include interest expense. The reason being that this ratio is looking to find profitability before payment to debt investors.

The denominator in the formula is invested capital. It is calculated as total assets less excess cash and non-interest bearing current liabilities.

$$
\text{ROIC} = \frac{\text{NOPAT}}{\text{Invested Capital}}
$$

### Cash Return on Invested Capital (CROIC)

CROIC is very similar to return on invested capital. The denominator in this ratio is exactly the same as the denominator in ROIC.

The difference is in the numerator. ROIC uses NOPAT, while CROIC uses free cash flow in the numerator. Free cash flow is a cash based metric and is therefore not subject to the many estimates that go into accrual based measures like earnings.

$$
\text{CROIC} = \frac{\text{Free Cash Flow}}{\text{Invested Capital}}
$$

### Gross Profitability Ratio

$$
\text{Gross Profitability Ratio} = \frac{\text{Gross Profit}}{\text{Assets}}
$$

The higher the gross profitability ratio, the better. It is a quick way to compare the amount of gross profits a business can generate from its asset base.

## Stock Price Risk Metrics

### Standard Deviation

Stock price (return series) standard deviation is the most commonly used risk metric. It is calculated as the annualized stock price standard deviation of a given security.

### Beta

Beta is a measure of the volatility, or systematic risk, of a security or a portfolio in comparison to the market as a whole. Beta is calculated by comparing the stock’s price movements to the movements of the market index. A Beta greater than 1 shows more price sensitivity. That is to say, if the market declines by 10%, one would expect a stock with a Beta over 1 to decline by more than 10%. The converse is true on gains. The higher the Beta, the riskier a stock is assumed to be.

### Maximum Drawdown

Maximum drawdown is the biggest decline a stock has suffered as measured from stock price high to stock price low.

### Value at Risk (VaR)

Value at Risk is used to calculate minimum potential loss at a given confidence interval. VaR typically uses historical returns and the normal distribution. As an example, you could say at the 99% confidence interval (1% chance) my minimum expected loss is 20%. Said another way, I expect to lose 20% or more of the value of my investment 1% of the time.

## Dividend Ratios & Metrics

### Dividend Yield

Dividend yield is a company’s dividend payments per share divided by its share price. It is one of the most used metrics in dividend investing. All other things being equal, the higher the better.

### Dividend Payout Ratio

The Dividend payout ratio is a company’s dividends divided by earnings. The higher the payout ratio is the larger the percentage of earnings being used to fund the dividend. By definition a payout ratio above 100% is unsustainable.

### Total Return

Total return is stock price appreciation (or depreciation) plus dividend payments. It is the total return from an investment, including capital gains and dividends.

Total return is typically used when calculating performance as dividends are often a large portion of total returns.

## Valuation Ratios, Metrics, and Formulas

### Price to Earnings (P/E)

The price-to-earnings ratio is one of the most important investing metrics to know. It is a quick way to broadly gauge the sentiment around a stock.

The higher the price-to-earnings ratio, the more you must pay for $1 of a company’s earnings. All other things being equal, a high price-to-earnings ratio signals the market expects rapid growth from a company while a low price-to-earnings ratio signals expected low or negative growth.

At a price-to-earnings ratio of 20, you must pay $20 for every $1 of annual earnings from the company. **The price-to-earnings ratio is calculated as share price divided by earnings**.

$$
\text{P/E} = \frac{\text{Share Price}}{\text{Earnings}}
$$

### Enterprise Value to EBITDA

$$
\text{EV/EBITDA} = \frac{\text{Enterprise Value}}{\text{EBITDA}}
$$

Similarly, Enterprise Value to EBIT is

$$
\text{EV/EBIT} = \frac{\text{Enterprise Value}}{\text{EBIT}}
$$

### Price to Sales

The price to sales metric uses the very first item on the income statement – sales. The advantage the price to sales ratio has over others is that it works for virtually all businesses. Not all businesses are profitable, but nearly all have sales.

The price to sales ratio helps to compare businesses that may not be profitable currently, or that are experiencing a temporary decline in profit margins.

### Price to Book Value

The price to book ratio compares the price of a stock to its book value (equity). This ratio works well for businesses that rely on assets or equity to produce cash flows. It is not well suited for franchises, and does not work at all on businesses with negative equity.

### Price to Earnings to Growth (PEG)

The PEG ratio takes into account growth rate when considering valuation. This is intuitive. A company growing at 10% a year should have a higher price-to-earnings ratio than a company growing at 2% a year. The PEG ratio takes this into account.

A PEG ratio below one is generally said to be a bargain. PEG is

$$
\text{PEG} = \frac{\text{P/E}}{\text{Growth Rate}\times 100}
$$

### Modified Price to Earnings to Growth Ratio

The PEG ratio does not take into account dividend payments. Dividends can be a large part of total returns. The modified PEG ratio does take dividends into consideration. We get

$$
\text{Modified PEG} = \frac{\text{P/E}}{(\text{Growth Rate} + \text{Dividend Yield})\times 100}
$$

### Earnings Yield

The earnings yield is the inverse of the price-to-earnings ratio. It shows what percentage of money would be returned to you by a company at a current price if you owned the business and distributed 100% of net profit.

## Balance Sheet & Debt Risk Metrics

### Equity to Assets Ratio

The equity to assets ratio shows the percentage of assets owned by the company.

The formula to calculate the equity to assets ratio is equity divided by assets.

The higher the equity to assets ratio, the greater percentage of the company’s assets that are owned by the company and not from debt purchases.

### Cash Flow to Debt Coverage Ratio

This ratio is calculated as operating cash flows divided by total debt.

The higher the ratio, the quicker a company can pay off its debts. If the ratio is above 1, the company could use its cash flows to pay off its debt in under a year.

### Quick Ratio

The quick ratio is used to determine a company’s short term liquidity situation. This is given by

$$
\text{Quick Ratio} = \frac{\text{Current Assets - Inventory}}{\text{Current Liabilities}}
$$

The quick ratio is designed to show if a company is able to meet its short term liabilities. If the quick ratio is below 1, the company is at serious risk of bankruptcy as it does not have enough cash on hand to pay debts coming due in the next year.

The higher the quick ratio, the better. The quick ratio is also known as the **acid test ratio**.

### Debt to Equity Ratio

The debt to equity ratio is calculated as total liabilities divided by equity.

The ratio is used to calculate how leveraged a company is relative to its owned value (as measured by equity).

Highly leveraged businesses are at greater risk of insolvency as they must continuously meet their debt holder payment obligations.
